KEP-2403: graduate to GA (#4045)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/2403-pod-resources-allocatable-resources/README.md

- [X] (R) KEP approvers have approved the KEP status as `implementable`
- [X] (R) Design details are appropriately documented
- [X] (R) Test plan is in place, giving consideration to SIG Architecture and SIG Testing input
  - [ ] e2e Tests for all Beta API Operations (endpoints)
  - [ ] (R) Ensure GA e2e tests meet requirements for [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
  - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed

> - [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved

Reviewer: Should these actually be checked?

* Enable node monitoring agents to know the allocatable compute resources on a node, thus properly calculate the node compute resource utilization.

### Non-Goals

> TBD

Reviewer: We can't / shouldn't graduate to stable with a TBD list of non goals. Maybe “None”?

Author: yep, my fault. Planned to fix into a subsequent commit (I should have used a draft PR or marked WIP). Fixed in the next upload.

Add additional tests to prove that unhealthy devices are skipped as part of GetAllocatable and empty NUMA topology is not returned.

[X] I/we understand the owners of the involved components may require updates to
existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary
to implement this enhancement.

##### Prerequisite testing updates

##### Unit tests

- `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/kubelet/api/podresources`: `20230530` - `68.6%`

##### Integration tests

N/A - node local feature covered by e2e test (`test/e2e_node`)

##### e2e tests

> - `NodeFeature:PodResources`: https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html?sig=node&test=NodeFeature%3APodResources

Reviewer 2: there are some failures by this link. Are those expected?

Author: not really, even though they seem platform issue more than test/production code issue

#### Beta to G.A Graduation
- [X] Allowing time for feedback (1 year).
- [X] Risks have been addressed.

>       Rate limiting implemented as part of the podresources endpoint GA graduation (KEP 606).

Reviewer 3: Should this be a separate sub-checkbox like?

```yaml
  - [ ] Rate limiting implemented as part of the podresources endpoint GA graduation (KEP 606).
```

- [X] Allowing time for feedback (1 year).
- [X] Risks have been addressed.

#### Deprecation

> 

Reviewer: What goes here?

Author: (here and below) I should have marked this PR WIP, thanks for your review and for pointing it out. I'll have a non-WIP upload shortly.

Kubelet will always be backwards compatible, so going forward existing plugins are not expected to break.

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

- [X] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
  - Feature gate name: `KubeletPodResourcesGetAllocatable`.
  - Components depending on the feature gate: kubelet, 3rd party consumers.

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

No

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

Yes, through feature gates.

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?

The API becomes available again. The API is stateless, so no recovery is needed, clients can just consume the data.

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

> A e2e test will demonstrate that when the feature gate is disabled, the API returns the appropriate error code.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
nit: An e2e test will demonstrate that when the feature gate is disabled, the API returns the appropriate error code.
```

Author: thanks, fixed

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

Kubelet may fail to start. The new API may report inconsistent data, or may cause the kubelet to crash.

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

`pod_resources_endpoint_errors_get_allocatable` - but only with feature gate enabled. Otherwise the API will always return a known error, giving a false negative signal.

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?

Not Applicable.

###### Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs, fields of API types, flags, etc.?

No (Not applicable)

### Monitoring Requirements

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

- Look at the `pod_resources_endpoint_requests_get_allocatable` metric exposed by the kubelet.

> - Clients are connected to the podresources unix socket, for example  bychecking which containers mount the podresources socket path.

Reviewer 3: nit: ```suggestion
- Clients are connected to the podresources unix socket, for example by checking which containers mount the podresources socket path.
```

Author: thanks, fixed

###### How can someone using this feature know that it is working for their instance?

- [ ] Events
  - Event Reason: 
- [ ] API .status
  - Condition name: 
  - Other field: 
- [X] Other (treat as last resort)
  - Look at the `pod_resources_endpoint_requests_get_allocatable` and `pod_resources_endpoint_errors_get_allocatable` metrics exposed by the kubelet.

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

Not Applicable

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

- [X] Metrics

>   - Metric name: TBD

Reviewer 3: TBD??

Author: thanks for catching! missed previously, fixed.

  - [Optional] Aggregation method:
  - Components exposing the metric: kubelet

###### Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability of this feature?

As part of this feature enhancement, per-API-endpoint resources metrics are being added; to observe this feature the `pod_resources_endpoint_requests_get_allocatable` metric should be used. We will also add error counting metrics to improve the observability of the API.

TBD

### Dependencies

###### Does this feature depend on any specific services running in the cluster?

No

### Scalability

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new API calls?

No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in introducing new API types?

No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new calls to the cloud provider?

No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing size or count of the existing API objects?

No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing time taken by any operations covered by existing SLIs/SLOs?

> No. Feature is out of existing any paths in kubelet.

Reviewer 3: The second sentence looks gibberish to me 🤔 Reword(?) or maybe it's just me...

Author: thanks for pointing this out, reworded.

Kubelet will always be backwards compatible, so going forward existing plugins are not expected to break.

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

- [X] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
  - Feature gate name: `KubeletPodResourcesGetAllocatable`.
  - Components depending on the feature gate: kubelet, 3rd party consumers.

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

No

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

> Yes, through feature gates.

Reviewer 4: Due to graduation of this feature to GA, the feature gate is going to be locked to on by default and hence [cannot be changed](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/staging/src/k8s.io/component-base/featuregate/feature_gate.go#L70). This is done part of standard practice of graduating the feature to GA and I think we should just state that here.

Author: Good point, thanks. Added a note.

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?

Not Applicable.

###### Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs, fields of API types, flags, etc.?

No (Not applicable)

### Monitoring Requirements

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

- Look at the `pod_resources_endpoint_requests_get_allocatable` metric exposed by the kubelet.
- Clients are connected to the podresources unix socket, for example by checking which containers mount the podresources socket path.

###### How can someone using this feature know that it is working for their instance?

- [ ] Events
  - Event Reason: 
- [ ] API .status
  - Condition name: 
  - Other field: 
- [X] Other (treat as last resort)
  - Look at the `pod_resources_endpoint_requests_get_allocatable` and `pod_resources_endpoint_errors_get_allocatable` metrics exposed by the kubelet.

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

> Not Applicable

Reviewer 5: The section below this mentions adding error counting metrics and the diff from the previous version mentioned a `pod_resources_endpoint_errors_list` metric, along with a `pod_resources_endpoint_requests_total` and `pod_resources_endpoint_requests_list` metric that seem to be missing from here. Does this have an expected 100% availability if the kubelet is running?

Author: yes, because this API ultimately exposes, in read only mode, (a processed form of) kubelet internal data which is critical for functioning of the kubelet.

I'll make this information more explicit in the KEP text.

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

- [X] Metrics
  - Metric name:
    - `pod_resources_endpoint_requests_get_allocatable`
    - `pod_resources_endpoint_errors_get_allocatable`
  - Components exposing the metric: kubelet

###### Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability of this feature?

As part of this feature enhancement, per-API-endpoint resources metrics are being added; to observe this feature the `pod_resources_endpoint_requests_get_allocatable` metric should be used. We will also add error counting metrics to improve the observability of the API.

> TBD

Reviewer 5: What is the TBD aspect of this? Were the error counting metrics added as part of the work to bring this up to beta? Could you include details of that here for a little more clarity, since this will be graduating to GA?

Author: The TBD is a leftover form previous edit :)
Added some clarifications about the available metrics and their purpose

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in non-negligible increase of resource usage (CPU, RAM, disk, IO, ...) in any components?

Negligible amount of CPU and memory, because the endpoint queries existing data structures inside the kubelet.

###### Can enabling / using this feature result in resource exhaustion of some node resources (PIDs, sockets, inodes, etc.)?

No, because the endpoint queries existing data structures inside the kubelet.

### Troubleshooting

###### How does this feature react if the API server and/or etcd is unavailable?

No impact, the feature is node-local

###### What are other known failure modes?

feature gate disabled: the API will always return a well-known error. In normal operation, the API is expected to never return error and always return
a valid response, because it utilizes internal kubelet data which is always available.
Bugs may lead to the API to return unexpected errors, or to return inconsistent data.
Consumers of the API should treat unexpected errors as bugs of this API.

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?

> Not available.

Reviewer 5: If users of this feature do encounter unexpected errors and/or inconsistent data, what actions should they/can they take to troubleshoot the unexpected errors and remediate the issues?  Is it possible that end users can see any errors here as a result of the rate limiting introduced as part of the pod resources endpoint GA graduation?

Author: Good point. Clarified in the text.
Since the API exposes internal kubelet data (ofc in read only) pertaining to resource allocation, it can be a early warning (or a proxy messenger) of kubelet allocation issues. In this case the only possible investigation is to check kubelet logs. Amended the KEP text to reflect this fact

###### Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability of this feature?

As part of this feature enhancement, per-API-endpoint resources metrics are being added; to observe this feature the `pod_resources_endpoint_requests_get_allocatable` metric should be used. We will also add error counting metrics to improve the observability of the API.

TBD

### Dependencies

###### Does this feature depend on any specific services running in the cluster?

No

### Scalability

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new API calls?

No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in introducing new API types?

No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new calls to the cloud provider?

No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing size or count of the existing API objects?

No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing time taken by any operations covered by existing SLIs/SLOs?

No. Feature is out of existing any paths in kubelet.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in non-negligible increase of resource usage (CPU, RAM, disk, IO, ...) in any components?

> Negligible amount of CPU and memoru, because the endpoint queries existing data structures inside the kubelet

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
Negligible amount of CPU and memory, because the endpoint queries existing data structures inside the kubelet.
```
